Parsons School of Design, The New School
School of Art, Media and Technology
Master of Science, Data Visualization

Data Structures

PGDV 5110 Syllabus, Fall 2016

Tuesday, 7:00pm - 9:40pm 
Innovation Center, 6 E 16th Street, Room 603

Faculty: Aaron Hill

Teaching Assistant: Priyal Parikh | Office Hours: Fridays 4pm - 6pm

Curating raw data presents issues of technology, speed, and efficiency, as well as broader ethical considerations of what it means to represent and make conclusions about groups and individuals from their data. This course covers the database, semi-structured data, and unstructured data. Students will gain familiarity with underlying data structures; techniques and tools, including acquisition, augmentation, and restructuring; data storage and aggregation; access to parallel and distributed computing; high-volume data, disparate sources, and performance; and streaming data, real time, and dynamic queries.

Prerequisites
Working knowledge of JavaScript, HTML/CSS, Linux command line, Git, and GitHub.

Course Outline

August 30 (Week 1)

Introduction to data structures.

Weekly Assignment 1, due 9/5 at 4:00pm [ level 1 | level 2 | level 3 ]
You will "get" some HTML files, save them, and study their structure.

Documentation
Node request module
Node fs module
September 6 (Week 2)

Fundamental data structures. The web as a database. "Raw data."

Read
Gitelman, Introduction and Color Plates
Wirth, Niklaus. Algorithms + Data Structures = Programs (1976), pp. 7-44
Javascript data types and structures
Working with objects (JavaScript)
Weekly Assignment 2, due 9/12 at 4:00pm [ level 1 | level 2 ]
You will parse one of the HTML files you saved last week and log essential data to the console.

Documentation
Node cheerio module
Introduction to the DOM
September 13 (Week 3)

Data augmentation and integration.

Read
Gitelman, Chapter 5
Weekly Assignment 3, due 9/19 at 4:00pm [ level 1 | level 2 ]
Using data you parsed last week, you will interface with the Google Maps API to augment the data you collected.

Documentation
Google Maps API
Google Geocoding API
Node Async module
OPTIONAL: More information about creating and using environment variables in Linux.
September 20 (Week 4)

Data models I: NoSQL database.

Read
Gitelman, Chapter 6
Weekly Assignment 4, due 9/26 at 4:00pm [ level 1 | level 2 ]
You will begin to write the data you collected, parsed, and augmented to MongoDB: a NoSQL database. You will create, administer, and maintain the database.

Documentation
MongoDB Manual
MongoDB data types (documents)
MongoDB Data Models
Another data model: denormalization
MongoDB inserting documents
Setting up MongoDB in Cloud 9
Node mongodb module
Documentation: book
MongoDB: The Definitive Guide, Kristina Chodorow
September 27 (Week 5)

NoSQL database: indexes, query optimization, and data restructuring.

Read
Gitelman, Chapter 1
Weekly Assignment 5, due 10/3 at 4:00pm [ level 1 | level 2 ]
You will query data from the NoSQL database you have created, restructuring the data in the process.

Documentation
MongoDB queries
MongoDB aggregation
aggregation quick reference
SQL to MongoDB Mapping Chart (helpful if you already know SQL)
October 4 (Week 6)

Data cleaning. Logging issues.

Read
Gitelman, Chapter 4
For Big-Data Scientists, 'Janitor Work' Is Key Hurdle to Insights, The New York Times, August 17, 2014
Weekly Assignment 6, due 10/17 at 4:00pm
You will start logging issues and "cleaning" the data in your database.

Final assignment 1 distributed, due 12/19 at 4:00pm [ level 1 | level 2 ]

Documentation
Mongo indexes
GitHub issues
Further reading
Petzold, Charles. Code: The Hidden Language of Computer Hardware and Software. 2000.
October 11: Yom Kippur, No Class

October 18 (Week 7)

Sensors. Data gathering and surveillance.

Read
Gitelman, Chapter 7
Install
Arduino IDE
Weekly Assignment 7, due 10/25 at 4:00pm
Switching gears from previous assignments, you will use a microcontroller and sensors to collect and log data to your local computer. You will also design (in concept only) an interactive visualization of the data you will collect from the sensor.

Documentation
Arduino button
Adafruit tutorials
Further reading
Make: Sensors: A Hands-On Primer for Monitoring the Real World with Arduino and Raspberry Pi, Tero Karvinen et al.
October 25 (Week 8)

Data models II: SQL database.

Read
Gitelman, Chapter 2
Weekly Assignment 8, due 11/7 at 4:00pm
You will create a SQL database (using a managed database service) and begin writing your sensor data to it.

Documentation
Johnny-Five
PostgreSQL data types
Node pg module
Further reading
PostgreSQL documentation
November 1 (Week 9)

SQL database: indexes, query optimization, and data restructuring. Importing and exporting static files from databases.

Read
Gitelman, Chapter 8
Weekly Assignment 9, due 11/7 at 4:00pm
You will query data from the SQL database you have created, restructuring the data in the process.

Documentation
SQL tutorial
November 8 (Week 10; meets 6:00pm - 8:00pm)

Election Data: Sources, Structures, Streams, and Scale

November 15 (Week 11)

Streams and real-time data exchange.

Moving to the front end of the web: infrastructure, efficiency, and latency.

Read
What is code?
How the internet works
Weekly Assignment 10, due 11/28 at 4:00pm
You will create a basic API for the sensor data you have been collecting in previous assignments. The API must write a stream.

Documentation
Express
Handlebars
socket.io
Further reading
Web Development with Node and Express: Leveraging the JavaScript Stack, Ethan Brown
November 22: No class

November 29 (Week 12)

Efficient data processing and delivery, at scale. Going beyond the single node. Cloud and distributed computing.

Final assignment 2 distributed, due 12/19 at 4:00pm

Read
Gitelman, Chapter 3
MapReduce: Simplified Data Processing on Large Clusters, Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat
Bigtable: A Distributed Storage System for Structured Data, Fay Chang, Jeffrey Dean, Sanjay Ghemawat, Wilson C. Hsieh, Deborah A. Wallach, Mike Burrows, Tushar Chandra, Andrew Fikes, and Robert E. Gruber
immens paper
December 6 (Week 13)

One-on-one meetings this week. We will not meet as a class. Schedule a meeting time here for Tuesday 12/6 or Thursday 12/8. If you cannot find a time on one of those days, let me know and we'll find a time that works for you.

Read
Gitelman, "Data Flakes" (afterword)
December 13 (Week 14)

Ethical implications of representation with data.

Read
The Code We Can't Control
The Policy Machine
Can a computer be arrested for buying drugs?
December 20 (Week 15)

Final assignment presentations.

Learning Outcomes

By the successful completion of this course, students will be able to demonstrate:

Proficiency with various techniques to acquire, process, restructure, and analyze raw data.
Ability to program and work within structured and unstructured databases to deliver and exchange data.
Knowledge of methods for web development, hosting, and processing of data for visualizations, often from very large data sources.
An understanding of computer science principles that support computational efficiency and speed.
An understanding of the limitations and ethical considerations when using data to represent individuals and groups.
Final Grade Calculation

Attendance and Class Participation	20%
Weekly Assignments (12 total)	35%
Final assignment 1	25%
Final Assignment 2	20%
Late assignments:

If an assignment is less than 24 hours late, the maximum possible grade is 75%.
If an assignment is 24-48 hours late, the maximum possible grade is 50%.
If an assignment is 48-72 hours late, the maximum possible grade is 25%.
If an assignment is more than 72 hours late, no credit will be given.
Required Reading

"'Raw Data' Is an Oxymoron", Lisa Gitelman, 2013
REFERENCE: MongoDB: The Definitive Guide, Kristina Chodorow, 2013
